# How to Create a Visual Inventory #

## Of the Iliadic Text ##

1. Create a new csv (comma separated values) file in a text editor or on github in the “Indices” folder in your repository.

2. Label the columns: **URN** and **ImageReference**

3. Under **URN** record the urn reference to line of text in the manuscript. They should be formatted like this: urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.msA.hmt:BOOK#.LINE#

4. Under **Image Reference** include the urn generated by the image citation tool for that line. Make sure this urn is enclosed in quotes "..." 

## Of the Scholia ##

1. Create a new csv (comma separated values) file in a text editor or on github in the “Collections” folder in your repository.

2. Label the columns: **Text**, **ImageReference**, and **FolioReference**.

3. Under **Text** record the urn reference to the scholion. It should be formatted like this: urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.ScholiaDocument.hmt:BOOK#.UniqueReference. The Scholia Document changes based on the type of scholion.
	- Main Scholia = msA
	- Intermarginal Scholia = msAim
	- Interior Scholia = msAint
	- Exterior Scholia = msAext
	- Interlinear Scholia = msAil
The Unique Reference must be unique. There can be no other scholia of the same type with that same reference. Here is an example of a full urn for a scholion: urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msA.hmt:10.1. 

4. Under **Image Reference** include the urn generated by the image citation tool for that scholion. Make sure this urn is enclosed in quotes "..."

5. Under **Folio Reference** include the urn for the folio on which the scholion is located. These urns are formatted like this: urn:cite:hmt:msA.FOLIO