# How to create a visual inventory of edited texts #

## Rationale ##

All our editorial work is keyed to documentary visual evidence.  For every citable node of text that we edit, we identify a  region of interest on an image.

## Visual inventory of lines of the *Iliad* ##

Previous contributors to the Homer Multitext project have indexed lines of the *Iliad* to the physical page where they occur int he Venetus A manuscript:  you will record the further evidence of where you see the line on a default image for ha page.  To create an inventory of the lines of the *Iliad* that you edit, you only need to associate the URN for the text with the URN for the visual evidence.  In the CITE architecture, we can do this with an *index* consisting of pairs of URNs.

In your virtual machine, you will find an index named `indices/venA-textToImage-Iliad.csv`.  (Be sure you can identify this file both in your clone of the repository on  your virtual machine, and using the web interface to github.)

Note that the index has two columns labelled **Text** and **Image**.

3. Under **Text** record the CTS URN reference to line of text in the manuscript. They should be formatted like this: `urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.msA:BOOK.LINE`

4. Under **Image**, include the CITE URN generated by the image citation tool for that line. Make sure this urn is enclosed in quotes "..."



## Visual inventory of scholia ##

In contrast to the text of the *Iliad*, there is no complete inventory of scholia in any of the manuscripts of the *Iliad*.  Your work on this visual inventory will be part of the first complete scholarly record of the scholia.

Because no one even knows how many scholia exist, there is no prior canonical way to cite them.  You will have to assign each scholion you identify a unique identifier, associate it with a physical page, and include a reference to the documentary visual evidence for the scholion.   We will do this in a record with three pieces of information:  the text passage, the region of interest on the image, and the page.

In the `collections` directory of your virtual machine, you will find five files that define a structure like this for the five distinct sets of scholia you are likely to encounter:  the main scholia  (`venA-mainScholia.csv`), the intermarginal scholia (`venA-intermarginal.csv`), the interior scholia (`venA-interior.csv`), the exterior scholia (`venA-exterior.csv`) and the interlinear scholia (`venA-interlinear.csv`).  (As before, verify that you can find each of these both in the clone of your repository in your VM, and through the web interface to github.)

Note that each of these files has columns labelled **Text**, **Image**, and **Folio**.


### Text (CTS URN) ###


Under **Text** record the CTS URN reference to the scholion. It should be formatted like this: urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.SCHOLIADOCUMENT.hmt:TEAM.UNIQUEREFERENCE.   TEAM will be given to you (e.g., `12A`).  SCHOLIADOCUMENT is one of

- Main Scholia = `msA`
- Intermarginal Scholia = `msAim`
- Interior Scholia = `msAint`
- Exterior Scholia = `msAext`
- Interlinear Scholia = `msAil`

UNIQUEREFERENCE is the part you will assign, and must be unique. There can be no other scholia of the same type with that same reference. Here is an example of a full urn for a scholion: 

    urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msA:10.1. 


## Image ##


Under **Image** include the CITE URN generated by the image citation tool for that scholion. Make sure this urn is enclosed in quotes "..."

## Folio ##

Under **Folio** include the CITE URN for the folio on which the scholion is located. These urns are formatted like this: 

    urn:cite:hmt:msA.FOLIOSIDE


