# "The Venetian Homer in 2014" #


In 1899, Thomas W. Allen published an article analyzing the composition of the Venetus A manuscript.[^1]  Written before Comparetti's facsimile edition was published, Allen's article was at the time of its publication essentially "write-only" scholarship:  the only possible place to read it critically was in the manuscript reading room of the Marciana Library.  Nevertheless, Allen meticulously documented every assertion with precise references to specific observations in the manuscript.  Today, the Homer Multitext project not only makes it possible view the manuscript in high-quality images both from original photography taken in 2007 and from digital versions of Comparetti's facsimile from anywhere on the internet:  we can also cite the visual evidence with canonical URN references.

In the course of our seminar, we will collaborate on a twenty-first century reworking of Allen's study using URN references to identify all evidence.  Each editorial team has been assigned a passage of Allen's work.  (Assignments are listed on the README of each team's github repository.)  The team's primary task is to present Allen's argument in summary or paraphrase, but with full citation of his evidence.  The twenty-first century version should be formatted in citedown, that is, markdown with URN notation for citation of all evidence.


[^1]: Allen, Thomas W. "On the Composition of Some Greek Manuscripts: The Venetian Homer," *Journal of Philology* 26 (1899) 161-181.



Resources:

- pdf of Allen's original article:  [from Google books](http://books.google.com/books?id=7VoKAAAAIAAJ&dq=%22Journal%20of%20Philology%22%20Allen%20Composition%20Greek%20Manuscripts&pg=PA161#v=onepage&q&f=false); from [HMT project web site](http://www.homermultitext.org/pd-pdfs/Allen-JP-1899.pdf)
